SQL :- SQL stands for Structured Query Language.SQL lets you access and manipulate databases
       SQL became a standard of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) in 1986, and of the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) in 1987.

SQL Server :- SQL Server is a relational database management system (RDBMS) developed by Microsoft.It is also called MS SQL Server. 
            This product is built on the basic function of storing and retrieving data as required by other applications. 
            It can be run either on the same computer or on another across a network.

*main components and services of SQL server:
      Database Engine: This component handle storage, Rapid transaction Processing, and Securing Data.

      SQL Server: This service starts, stops, pauses, and continues an instance of Microsoft SQL Server. Executable name is sqlservr.exe.

      SQL Server Agent: It performs the role of Task Schedule.It can be triggered by any event or as per demand.Executable name is sqlagent.exe.

      SQL Server Browser: This listens to the incoming request and connects to the desired SQL server instance.Executable name is sqlbrowser.exe.

      SQL Server Full-Text Search: This lets user running full-text queries against Character data in SQL Tables.Executable name is fdlauncher.exe.

      SQL Server VSS Writer: This allows backup and restoration of data files when the SQL server is not running.Executable name is sqlwriter.exe.

      SQL Server Analysis Services (SSAS): Provide Data analysis, Data mining and Machine Learning capabilities. 
              SQL server is integrated with R and Python language for advanced analytics. Executable name is msmdsrv.exe.

       SQL Server Reporting Services (SSRS): Provides reporting features and decision-making capabilities.
                             It includes integration with Hadoop. Executable name is ReportingServicesService.exe.

      SQL Server Integration Services (SSIS): Provided Extract-Transform and Load capabilities of the different type of data from one source to another. 
										 It can be view as converting raw information into useful information. Executable name is MsDtsSrvr.exe.
    *featuresof sql server
    user experience
    availability
    performance
    analytics
    security
    buisness intelligence

      Importance of SQL Server Instances
     1. For installation of different versions on one machine
     2. For cost reduction
     3. For maintenance of development, production and test environments separately
     4. For reducing temporary database problems
     5. For separating security privileges
     6. For maintaining a standby server


Database :- A database is an organized collection of data, so that it can be easily accessed and managed.
            you can organize data into tables, rows, columns, and index it to make it easier to find relevant information.
   
      types of DBMS :-
                       hierarchical DBMS
                       network DBMS
                       relational DBMS
                      object-oriented DBMS
 

4 types of SQL Command
1. Data Definition Language(DDL) :- It consists of the commands used to define the schema.
    CREATE :- The CREATE DATABASE statement is used to create a new SQL database.
   syntax :- 
            CREATE DATABASE databasename;

     DROP:- This command is used to delete objects from the database.
     syntax :- 
               DROP DATABASE databasename;

      ALTER:- This is used to alter the structure of the database.
       syntax :- 
                   ALTER TABLE table_name
                   ADD column_name datatype;

                   ALTER TABLE table_name
                   DROP COLUMN column_name;

  TRUNCATE :- This is used to remove all records from a table, including all spaces allocated for the records are removed.
      syntax :- truncate table tablename;
2. Data Manipulation Language(DML) :- It deals with the manipulation of data present in database.
      INSERT :- It is used to insert data into a table.
     syntax:-
           INSERT INTO TABLENAME('value1','value2','value3'); 
3. Data Control Language(DCL) :- It deals with the right permission and controls of the database system.
4. Transaction Control Language(TCL) :- It constist of command which deals with the transaction of database.

Data Types :- The SQL Server Data Types are the attribute that specifies what types of data entered by the user such as integer, character, decimal, date time, etc. 
             In SQL Server Database, each column of a table, all the local variables, and parameters must have a data type.

     1. Exact numeric
     2. Approximate numeric
     3. Date and time
     4. Character strings
     5. Unicode character strings
     6. Binary strings
     7. Other data types

Exact numeric :-
                  1. bigint - It stores whole numbers in the range given 8 bytes
                  2. int - It stores whole numbers in the range given 4 bytes (2,147,483,648)
                  3. smallint -	It stores whole numbers in the range given 2 bytes (32,767)	
                  4. tinyint - It stores whole numbers in the range given 1 byte (0,255)	
                  5. bit - It can take 0, 1, or NULL values.1 byte/8bit column (0,1)

Approximate numeric :- These datatypes in SQL are mostly used in scientific calculations.
                                             1. float - Used for a floating precision number 7 Digit (−1.79E+308,1.79E+308)

Date and time :- It stores data of type Date and time.
                1. DateTime Used for specifying a date and time from January 1, 1753 to December 31, 9999.	8 bytes(1753-01-01,9999-12-31)
                2. date	Used to store only date from January 1, 0001 to December 31, 9999 3 bytes (0001-01-01,9999-12-31)
                3. time	Used for storing only time only values with an accuracy of 100 nanoseconds. 5 bytes

Character Strings :- It allows the user to define the data type of character which can be of fixed and variable length. 
                   1. char - It is a character string with a fixed width.  8000 chars
                   2. varchar - This is a character string with variable width.
                   3. varchar (max)	This is a character string with a variable width. It stores a maximum of 1,073,741,824 characters.

Unicode Character Strings :- This category store the full range of Unicode character which uses the UTF-16 character encoding.
                                                         1.  nchar - It is a Unicode string of fixed width (0 ,4000 )
                       2. nvarchar - It is a unicode string of variable width (0 ,4000) 

Binary Strings :- This category contains a binary string of fixed and variable length.
               1. binary - It is a fixed width binary string. It stores a maximum of 8,000 bytes.

Constraints :- Constraints are used to limit the type of data that can go into a table. This ensures the accuracy and reliability of the data in the table. 
                                    If there is any violation between the constraint and the data action, the action is aborted.
       1.  Not Null :- The NOT NULL constraint enforces a column to NOT accept NULL values.
                   This enforces a field to always contain a value, which means that you cannot insert a new record, or update a record without adding a value to this field.

       2. Unique :- The UNIQUE constraint ensures that all values in a column are different. 

       3. Check :- The CHECK constraint is used to limit the value range that can be placed in a column.

       4.  Default :- The DEFAULT constraint is used to set a default value for a column.The default value will be added to all new records, if no other value is specified.  
      
       5. Index :- Indexes are used to retrieve data from the database more quickly than otherwise. The users cannot see the indexes, they are just used to speed up searches/queries.

            keys in DATABASE :-
                                 candidate Key
                                 super key
                                 primery  key
                                 alternate key
                                 foreign key
SQL clause :-
            where clause :-
                          The WHERE clause is used to filter records.
                          It is used to extract only those records that fulfill a specified condition.
                          Syntax :- 
                      SELECT column1, column2, ...
                      FROM table_name
                      WHERE condition;

Order By Clause :- 
                  The ORDER BY keyword is used to sort the result-set in ascending or descending order.
                  The ORDER BY keyword sorts the records in ascending order by default. To sort the records in descending order, use the DESC keyword.
           syntax :-  
                 SELECT column1, column2, ...
                 FROM table_name
                 ORDER BY column1, column2, ... ASC|DESC;

Group By clause :-
                  The GROUP BY statement groups rows that have the same values into summary rows, like "find the number of customers in each country".
                  The GROUP BY statement is often used with aggregate functions (COUNT(), MAX(), MIN(), SUM(), AVG()) to group the result-set by one or more columns.
        syntax :-
             SELECT column_name(s)
             FROM table_name
             WHERE condition
            GROUP BY column_name(s)
            ORDER BY column_name(s);

     IN :-
             The IN operator allows you to specify multiple values in a WHERE clause.
              The IN operator is a shorthand for multiple OR conditions.
    syntax :-
            SELECT column_name(s)
            FROM table_name
            WHERE column_name IN (value1, value2, ...);
 
Having Clause :- The HAVING clause was added to SQL because the WHERE keyword cannot be used with aggregate functions.
                                          The WHERE clause places conditions on the selected columns, whereas the HAVING clause places conditions on groups created by the GROUP BY clause.
            SYNTAX  :-
                SELECT column_name(s)
                FROM table_name
                WHERE condition
                GROUP BY column_name(s)
                HAVING condition
                ORDER BY column_name(s);
Sub Query :- A subquery is a query within another query. The outer query is known as the main query, and the inner query is known as a subquery.
    Syntax :-            
           SELECT column_name  
           FROM table_name  
          WHERE column_name expression operator   
                      ( SELECT column_name  from table_name WHERE ... );  

JOIN SQL :-
            A JOIN clause is used to combine rows from two or more tables, based on a related column between them.

   TYPES OF JOIN :-    1.INNER JOIN :- The INNER JOIN keyword selects records that have matching values in both tables.
                               SYNTAX :-
                                        SELECT column_name(s)
                                        FROM table1
                                       INNER JOIN table2
                                       ON table1.column_name = table2.column_name;

                   2.LEFT JOIN :- The LEFT JOIN keyword returns all records from the left table (table1), and the matching records from the right table (table2). 
                                   The result is 0 records from the right side, if there is no match.

                   3.RIGHT JOIN :- The RIGHT JOIN keyword returns all records from the right table (table2), and the matching records from the left table (table1).
                                    The result is 0 records from the left side, if there is no match.

                   4.FULL JOIN :- The FULL OUTER JOIN keyword returns all records when there is a match in left (table1) or right (table2) table records.

                   5.CROS JOIN :- When we combine two or more tables with each other without any condition (where or on) then we call this type of joins Cartesian or cross join. 
                                  In Cross Join, each record of a table is joined with each record of the other table involved in the join

                   6.SELF JOIN :- the table is joined with itself.
                                 SYNTAX :-
                                          SELECT column_name(s)
                                          FROM table1 T1, table1 T2
                                          WHERE condition;